\pagenumbering{arabic}
\doublespacing

# Introduction

Danish composer Hans Abrahamsen's *Wald* (2009), written for sinfonietta, is a series of variations that build on his earlier piece for woodwind quintet entitled *Walden* (1978). These two works are representative of Abrahamsen's first and third periods and exhibit characteristics common across his output, including economy of material, tightly controlled processes, and the reuse of musical materials from a previous work. The shared idea between the two is an imitative repeating call-and-response gesture in which the voices gradually go out of phase. Abrahamsen uses the technique briefly in *Walden* where it serves as the introduction but never returns in any fashion, while in *Wald*, the technique plays a foundational role and is found in many sections. This approach of reusing, recomposing, or otherwise referencing earlier music, both his own and others, has always been a part of Abrahamsen's compositional language but has undergone several changes over the three creative periods of his music to date.

<!-- Abrahamsen is one of several twentieth-century composers with a penchant for returning to their own previous works. Luciano Berio reworked his virtuosic solo *Sequenzas* into ensemble works in his *Chemins*; Pierre Boulez expanded many pieces into longer, larger, and labyrinthian recompositions (for instance in his *Notations*); Toru Takemitsu incorporated his "water theme" into a series of works during the 1980s and 1990s. The motivation to return to earlier material is different for each of these composers. -->

*Walden* is situated in the middle of Abrahamsen's first period, which lasts from 1970-1987. A precocious composer, Abrahamsen had written a well-received body of work by age 27 (1979), and the works of this first period are characterized by associations with Danish New Simplicity, neo-classicism, and polystylism. New Simplicity is a term drawn from Danish literary criticism[@Ernste, p. 8.] and applied to composers who sought "to 'simplify' (at least in the literal sense) material and technique, to establish a perceptible sense of form and to evolve a new relationship with past musical styles and objects."[@Thomas, p. 268.] Gavin Thomas proposes in his 1994 profile of Abrahamsen that New Simplicity was less of a style than an attitude towards style, and despite the label, the works need not be simple; they "may *be* simple, but [they] may also be dense, dissonant and entirely 'modern.'"[@Thomas, p. 268.] Indeed, the works of this period such as *Ten Preludes for String Quartet* (1973), *Winternacht* (1976-78), and *Walden* (1978), blend a clarity of expression and economy of musical materials with allusions to historical musical styles. For instance, over ten short movements, *Ten Preludes* gradually moves backward in time from a place of complex, chromatic modernism to Baroque pastiche. The final movements of *Winternacht* and *Walden* similarly contain polyrhythmic, polytonal superimpositions of hunting horn calls and Baroque dance rhythms.[@Ernste, p. 6]

Abrahamsen's later first period works, including *Märchenbilder* (1984) and *Lied in Fall* (1987), shed the explicit references to past styles. Along with *Nacht und Trompeten* (1981) and *Six Pieces* (1984), the late first period works show the development of a new approach in reusing his own musical materials. Beginning with *Nacht und Trompeten* (1981), Abrahamsen began more clearly reusing and recomposing recognizable passages of his own music. This orchestral work begins with the allusive, layered melodies that end *Winternacht* and juxtaposes them against more extroverted and exuberant outbursts along with tolling gongs and tam-tams. Of the work, Abrahamsen writes: "The music unfolds in a space, in which the memory of the earlier music has the same reality as the music of today. But the music of the memory is naturally distant and vague, whereas the music of today is present and gesticulated."[@NachtPN]

The second period, between 1988-1999, was difficult for Abrahamsen and accompanied by a significant decrease in his compositional output. In an interview with the New York Times, Abrahamsen describes being "paralyzed by the white paper" and "[feeling] that his music had become so complex that he no longer had the tools to create what he tried to imagine." He did complete several short works between 1988-1992,[^SeeAppendix] but throughout this period, which he calls his "fermata,"[@Molleson] his creative crisis stimulated another direction in the use of previous music: arrangement. Abrahamsen arranged works by Carl Nielsen, Per Nørgård, Maurice Ravel, Erik Satie, and Robert Schumann for ensembles ranging in size from woodwind quintet to chamber orchestra.[^NewArrangements] He also revisited and orchestrated his older works for alternate ensembles, including *Winternacht* (alt. 1987) and *Walden* (alt. 1995). A most significant discovery for Abrahamsen was a set of canons by Bach, BWV 1072-1078, which he arranged for septet with a distinctly minimalist aesthetic involving numerous repetitions of the canon (e.g., 58 times in the setting of BWV 1072).[@NYT]

This process of arrangement also included aspects of recomposition. For instance, in his 1991 sinfonietta arrangement of Bach's chorale *Befiehl du deine Wege* (BWV 272), Abrahamsen begins with two melodic fragments drawn from the last three bars of Danish composer Paul Rouders' work *Four Dances in One Movement*. Over a series of varied repetitions, Abrahamsen unfolds and reveals a setting of Bach's chorale melody by gradually add layers of counterpoint to the Rouders' fragments, which happen to be embedded in the chorale.[@BefiehlPN Program note.]

[^SeeAppendix]: See the appendix for a chronological list of works and their instrumentations and durations.

[^NewArrangements]: Since 2000, Abrahamsen has continued to make arrangements, including works by Claude Debussy, György Ligeti, and Carl Nielsen.

<!-- *Ten Studies* (1983-98) is perhaps the most important work completed during his second period for the way it served as the source for several works bookending this time. The first seven of the ten studies were composed between 1983-4^[**citation**] but the set was not completed until 1998 which enabled him to began writing his piano concerto. -->

The reflection and contemplation found through the practice of arranging older music in this second period catalyzed the onset of Abrahamsen's third period from 2000 until the present day (2016). The *Concerto for Piano and Orchestra* (1999-2000) initiated this fertile period of artistic synthesis that combines an increased tendency to reuse previous material along with new innovations in compositional technique. Each of the *Piano Concerto*'s four movements, for instance, contains recast music: the first movement's flickering piano arpeggiations revisit the third movement of the *Ten Studies for Piano* (1983-98), the second movement's opening piano solo is a literal repetition of a passage from mm. 45-63 in the second movement of *Märchenbilder*,[@Michelsen] the second and third movement contain quotations from Mahler's fifth symphony and Ligeti's *Trio for Violin, Horn and Piano*, and the fourth movement is an arrangement of the *Ten Studies*'s eighth movement "Rivière D'Oubli." In each case, Abrahamsen surrounds the older material with new material and further explores the former's developmental possibilities and orchestration.

<!-- more on this aspect? -->

With *Schnee* (2006-08) and *Wald* (2008-09), Abrahamsen's style and technique crystalized into one characterized by tightly controlled and limited musical materials, microtonal sonorities, repeated material delineated by repeat signs, frequent changes of meter, tempo modulations, and complex polyrhythms. The two works are drastically different in scope and instrumentation: *Schnee* lasts an hour and is scored for nine musicians, while *Wald* lasts eighteen minutes and is scored for fifteen musicians. Abrahamsen has nonetheless indicated that *Wald* is a "twin piece" to *Schnee*,[@WaldPN Program note] and indeed they share not only the aforementioned characteristics but also clearly articulated forms and symmetrical ensemble seating arrangements. While *Schnee* has gained greater notoriety, partly due to its striking length, *Wald* better exemplifies the synthesis of Abrahamsen's third period, where previous materials are recast and further developed within new compositional resources.

From the earlier references and allusions to historical styles, to arrangements of his own and others' past works, and finally to the creation of new works from his earlier musical material, the trajectory of Abrahamsen's creative output reveals a composer whose relationship with external material has changed over time. He is an artist continually in dialogue with himself and the works of the past, somewhat like Brahms or Mahler. Abrahamsen's motivation for frequently returning to his "previous works and sketches" stems from a desire to explore "hidden opportunities and ways" to develop them into new works that he may not have seen at first.[@10SinfsPN] He connects this practice to the experience of visiting the Munch Museum in Oslo where he recalls seeing "how Munch painted the same subject over and over again, 'investigating it in many different ways from the small black-and-white sketch to the huge painting. For me it is the same. I have been haunted by these pieces for years and have been challenged to re-investigate the material to understand why.'"[@FourPiecesPN]

*Walden* and *Wald* are uniquely situated in this context as representative first and third period works that have strong connections to each other and to other works, including *Winternacht* and *Schnee*. This dissertation will examine Abrahamsen's economical approach to musical materials through their recontextualization and variation both within and among the works. Abrahamsen has said that the "hidden opportunity" he returns to in *Wald* is the call-and-response technique from *Walden*'s opening,[@WaldPN] but this dissertation will also argue that Abrahamsen also revisits another aspect of *Walden*, which is the recontextualization of musical materials from the first movement to the second movement. In order to establish the framework guiding the analysis of *Walden* and *Wald*, Part One will present an overview of the methodology in a summary of the terms, naming conventions, and approaches to segmentation and associative organization from Dora Hanninen's book *A Theory of Musical Analysis: On Segmentation and Associative Organization*. The analysis of *Walden* in Part Two and *Wald* in Part Three will then identify the work's shared and unique associative sets and their associative organization.

<!--
Of course, Hans Abrahamsen is not the first composer to reuse his own prior materials as the basis for new works. The twentieth century is filled with composers who fit this model and have differing motivations for continually revisiting their own works. Luciano Berio's *Sequenzas* and his recomposition and arrangements if them in his *Chemins*, Pierre Boulez and his incessant reworking of a small body of work over and over again, Toru Takemitsu and his "water theme" which waxes and wanes through a variety of compositions in the 1980s and 1990s, Franco Donatoni whose builds his works off fragments of the previous
-->
