\newpage

# Part 2: An Analysis of *Walden*

## Background

Abrahamsen's *Walden*, from 1978, is deeply inspired by nature and, like other first period works, directly references a work from another artistic medium.[^References] The title is taken from the literary work of the same name by 19^th^-century author Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862). Thoreau's text is a poetic and introspective reflection on self-reliance, simplicity, and society. It documents his two-year experiment living in austere conditions at Walden Pond in Concord, Massachusetts. Abrahamsen's program note for *Walden* touches on the connection to Thoreau as well as the kinds of musical material found in the piece:

> The title is taken from the American philosopher and poet Henry David Thoreau’s novel from 1854 about living in the woods, which Thoreau did for two years. His stay there was an experiment, an attempt to strip away all the artificial needs imposed by society and rediscover man’s lost unity with nature. In that particular sense his novel is a documentation of social inadequacy and a work of poetry (Utopia) as well. All though Thoreau himself never completed any actual social analysis he was way ahead of his own time in his perception of the economy and cyclic character of Nature, today known as ecology.
>
> *Walden* was written in a style of re-cycling and "new simplicity." A lot of superfluous material has been peeled away in order to give space to different qualities such as identity and clarity. Various layers are encountered in the quintet such as the organic (growth, flowering, decay), concretism (mechanical patterns) and finally the descriptive (distant horn calls and other ghost-like music of the past enter our consciousness like a dream).

[^References]: Ernste (2006) points out that Abrahamsen often references art, literature, poetry, or other music in his first period works. For instance, he dedicates the first and fourth movements of *Winternacht* (1976-78) to Austrian poet Georg Trakl, the second to Dutch graphic artist M.C. Escher, and the third, the most neo-classical in nature, to Igor Stravinsky. This practice extends to borrowing titles, including *Märchenbilder* and *Trauemlieder* from Robert Schumann and *let me tell you* (2014) from the novel by Paul Griffiths.

The connection between Thoreau's rejection of excess and Abrahamsen's economy of materials in this piece is a clear one. *Walden*'s simple and unadorned musical ideas, limited harmonic palette, recurring segments, and interconnected movements exemplify these aspects of stripping away and recycling. Despite their clear poetic kinship, the inspiration to write *Walden* did not come directly from Thoreau, since Abrahamsen discovered the book and decided on the title after completing the piece.[@Kullberg] He was attracted its association with the forest, "something pastoral," and Abrahamsen's discovery of Thoreau's book prompted him to "rediscover some qualities in [his] music, as Thoreau had tried to write about in his book."[@Kullberg]

The qualities mentioned in the program note, organicism, concretism, and descriptive, reflect how the material unfolds in each movement. Organicism is central to the first and second movements where Abrahamsen develops segments through additive processes like melodic expansion, augmentation, and diminution and organizes segments in cyclical configurations. Concretism[^ConcretismDescription] applies perhaps most clearly to the third movement for its use of "mechanical patterns" via heterophonic polyrhythms and oscillating patterns that compress in speed, ascend in register, and coalesce into an interlocking rhythmic texture. The description, "ghost-like music of the past," is relevant to both the pastoral horn calls in the first and third movements as well as the contrapuntal texture in the fourth movement, which is stylistically reminiscent of Baroque music.

[^ConcretismDescription]: Theo van Doesburg, founder of Art Concret, describes in his 1930 manifesto "The Basis of Concrete Art" a desire to reject "nature's formal properties," "sentimentality," "lyricism, dramaticism, symbolism, etc." Concretism, with its emphasis on abstraction, seems at odds with the nature-inspired *Walden*, but in this context, likely refers to Abrahamsen's use of strict processes and techniques.

## Instrumentation and Arrangement

Abrahamsen composed *Walden* in 1978 on a commission from the Funen Wind Quintet for a standard instrumentation of flute, clarinet in `A`, oboe, French horn, and bassoon. The work consists of four movements without titles that differ in duration and tempo while maintaining an introspective and restrained expressivity. In 1995, Abrahamsen created another arrangement for the Calefax Reed Quintet scored for oboe d'amore (doubling oboe), clarinet (doubling `A` and `Eb`), bass clarinet in `Bb`, alto saxophone, and bassoon. The reed quintet arrangement contains several differences, from smaller adjustments like tempi changes[^TempiChanges] and new descriptive markings to larger adjustments like re-metered movements and orchestration.

[^TempiChanges]: The first movement is slightly faster, while the second is slower, and the third and fourth remain the same.

Unlike much of Abrahamsen's other music, the original version of *Walden* contains remarkably few interpretative markings beyond isolated instances of descriptions such as *lontano*, *giocoso*, or *calmo*. The reed quintet version adds tempo markings including "Moderato fluente," "Alla marcia," "Andante," and "Allegretto giocoso" (first through fourth movements, respectively). The lack of textual description in the original version as well as the traditional tempo markings of the arrangement underscore the strong vein of neo-classicism that runs throughout Abrahamsen's first-period works.

The most significant modifications in the arrangement are to meter and orchestration. In the second movement, Abrahamsen changed the original meter of `4/4` and tempo of `eighthNote` = 76 to a meter of `4/8` in the arrangement to better reflect the underlying pulse. The rhythmic complexity of the original fourth movement is also simplified through re-metering. While notated in `4/4`, the original contains two polyrhythmic layers of `6/8` and `3/4` groupings indicated through brackets that often extend over bar lines. Abrahamsen re-meters the reed quintet arrangement in `3/4` and `12/16` to more clearly articulate the three-against-four polyrhythm inherent in the two layers. The re-metering of this movement also facilitates a metric modulation between the third and fourth movements, which are played attacca, where the speed of the quarter note at the end of the third becomes the speed of the dotted half note in the fourth.

The majority of the changes in orchestration reflect Abrahamsen's straightforward reassignment of instrumental lines. For movements I, II, and IV, Abrahamsen assigns each instrument of the original quintet to another instrument in the reed quintet. For instance, both versions have a clarinet in `A`, but in the first movement of the 1995 quintet, the clarinet performs the flute material from the 1978 quintet, while the alto saxophone performs the original clarinet material. The third movement contains several exceptions to this rearrangement process. Abrahamsen reassigns the original clarinet, horn, and bassoon material among multiple reed instruments for the duration of the movement. Table @tbl:walden-rearrangement gives an overview of the instrumental arrangement between these two versions. In all the subsequent discussions of *Walden*, the score for the original woodwind quintet will be the referenced version.

Table: Instrumental arrangement between versions. {#tbl:walden-rearrangement}

| Wind Quintet |      | Reed Quintet I. | Reed Quintet II. | Reed Quintet III. | Reed Quintet IV. |
|:-------------|:-----|:----------------|:-----------------|:------------------|:-----------------|
| Flute        | `->` | Cl. in `A`      | Al. Sax          | Cl. in `Eb`       | Cl. in `Eb`      |
| Oboe         | `->` | Ob. d'amore     | Oboe             | Oboe              | Oboe             |
| Cl. in `A`   | `->` | Al. Sax.        | Cl. in `A`       | multiple          | Al. Sax          |
| Horn in `F`  | `->` | Bs. Cl.         | Bs. Cl.          | multiple          | Bsn.             |
| Bassoon      | `->` | Bsn.            | Bsn.             | multiple          | Bs. Cl.          |

## Form

Abrahamsen's compositional process begins with formal structure, since he believes that in order to "make a piece that hangs together as music" one must have a "strong structure that makes it stick together in time."[@Kullberg] His approach to controlling the macro-level formal structure is evident in two elements that successively decrease with each movement: the total duration and number of sectional divisions. Abrahamsen has used the technique of controlling formal structure through proportion in many works; for instance, the movements or sections of *Winternacht*, *Schnee*, and *Wald* also decrease in duration over time, while the sections of *Märchenbilder* increase over time.[@MarchPN] In *Walden*, the decrease is not linear with respect to measurement in seconds but, nonetheless, each movement is shorter than the previous. On the other hand, the number of sectional divisions does decrease linearly; the first movement has with four sections, the second three, the third two, and finally, the fourth concludes as a single continuous statement. Abrahamsen delineates sections by changes in texture, harmonic collection, and compositional technique. Table @tbl:walden-structure displays these decreasing durations and number of section divisions. The two duration columns reflect the timings listed in the original score as well as the timings of the 1994 recording of the Scandinavian Wind Quintet.[@WaldenRec][^CalefaxRec]

[^CalefaxRec]: The Calefax Reed Quintet recording more closely reflects the listed score durations, but combined with the reed arrangement's adjusted tempi, the second movement ends up being slightly longer than the first.

Table: *Walden* movement proportions. {#tbl:walden-structure}

|      | Tempo                 | Score Duration | Recording Duration | Section One | Section Two | Section Three | Section Four |
|:-----|:----------------------|:---------------|:-------------------|:------------|:------------|:--------------|:-------------|
| I.   | `quarterNote` = 63-66 | 3:35           | 2:57               | 1-17 (17)   | 18-41 (24)  | 41-56 (16)    | 57-67 (11)   |
| II.  | `eighthNote` = 76     | 3:10           | 2:51               | 1-9 (9)     | 10-18 (9)   | 19-30 (12)    |              |
| III. | `quarterNote` = 52    | 2:30           | 2:33               | 1-10 (10)   | 10-32 (23)  |               |              |
| IV.  | `quarterNote` = 112   | 1:00           | 1:04               | 1-28 (28)   |             |               |              |

<!--
- general harmonic discussion here
- pieces are not tonal, per se, but there are moments of triadic sonorities
- D major at the ends of movements
-->

The first movement of *Walden* contains three dichotomies that play out over the course of the movement: 1) **harmonic ambiguity to harmonic clarity**, 2) heterophony to homophony, and 3) ensemble as soloists to ensemble as subsets. The beginning of the movement is **harmonically ambiguous** and heterophonic in texture, but by the end, the quintet is grouped into subsets (and eventually tutti) performing **harmonically clear** and homophonic music. The first section features a call-and-response pattern transformed over four phrases via a process of rhythmic displacement. The second section consists of a legato three-voice mensuration canon, while the third section is a variation on this canon paired with an interjecting staccato gesture in the horn and bassoon. Finally, the fourth section introduces a homophonic three-octave melody paired with the increasingly insistent staccato segment before abruptly transitioning into a tutti repeated D major chord.

The second movement is a recontextualization of associative sets from the first. In contrast to the development and organic growth of the first movement, the second is about transformation through decay and subtraction. Over the course of three nine-measure phrases, Abrahamsen recasts three associative sets in a cyclical and periodic ordering shaped by retrograde. The reused material from the first movement includes the three-octave melody, the horn and bassoon's staccato punctuation segment, and the oboe's `F#`-`C#` melodic segment. The music unfolds seamlessly over these three cycles, and with each successive cycle, Abrahamsen uses a strict process to filter segments from the texture.

Abrahamsen shapes the two sections of the third movement through rhythmic procedures of augmentation and diminution. The polyrhythmic and heterophonic first section, quite similar to the opening of the eighth movement of Ligeti's *Ten Pieces for Wind Quintet* (1968),[@Thomas, p. 272] gradually slows down over ten measures, while the second section accelerates over sixteen measures. At the climax, the oscillating segments characterizing the second section's accelerando fuse into a mechanical, sixteenth-note, arpeggiating pattern. The return of the first and second movement's oboe `F#`-`C#` melodic segment initiates the disintegration of this pattern in to an increasingly sparse texture containing a muted, triadic horn call evoking allusions to hunting and the forest.

The fleeting minute-long, polytonal finale of *Walden* is notated in `4/4` yet contains a composite texture of a duo for flute and bassoon in `3/4` and a trio for oboe, clarinet, and horn in `6/8`. The curious choice of `4/4` for the base meter perhaps connects to the "ghost-like music of the past" that Abrahamsen mentions in his program note; it is as if this music is entering from a distant time and place, suggested by its nonconformance to the given meter. <!-- **some preparation for the tonality of the fourth movement needed** --> The two layers begin in distant tonal key centers, `C#` minor in the duo and `Eb` major in the trio. They modulate toward one another and eventually join in D major by the last three measures. Despite their harmonic arrival, the duo and trio retain a sensation of occupying different worlds. Their clear and balanced classical phrasing never quite coincides, and the movement ends abruptly, mid-phrase "like a music box cutting out."[@Thomas, p. 268]

The following analysis will detail *Walden*'s four primary associative sets and their various manifestations throughout its four movements. The bulk of the discussion, though, will focus on the segments and associative organization present within the first and second movements. Abrahamsen recontextualizes associative sets between these two movements in ways that directly connect to *Wald*. Additionally, the two works share common compositional techniques and similar associative sets. Examining these aspects will establish a foundation from which to make comparisons to *Wald*.

<!-- perhaps this last para is the place to define recontextualization more directly? -->
