# Conclusion

Abrahamsen's treatment of musical material in *Walden* and *Wald* is not unique to these works. As one becomes familiar with a wide range of his music, it is evident that recomposition, recontextualization, and varied repetition play a prominent role in his compositional language. Abrahamsen is one of many twentieth-century composers with a penchant for returning to previous works. Luciano Berio reworked his virtuosic solo *Sequenzas* into ensemble works in his *Chemins* series. Pierre Boulez expanded several pieces into longer, larger, and labyrinthian recompositions (for instance in *...explosante-fixe...* or his *Notations*). Toru Takemitsu incorporated his "sea theme" into a series of works during the 1980s and 1990s (e.g., *Toward the Sea*, *Rain Tree Sketch*, and *I Hear the Water Dreaming*).

Each of these composers' approaches to earlier material is different, as is their motivations for doing so. Abrahamsen is driven by a desire to uncover and rediscover latent possibilities and meaning within the past. He connects his practice to the experience of visiting the Edvard Munch Museum in Oslo where he recalls seeing "how Munch painted the same subject over and over again, investigating it in many different ways from the small black-and-white sketch to the huge painting. For me it is the same. I have been haunted by these pieces for years and have been challenged to re-investigate the material to understand why."[@FourPiecesPN Program note.]

<!-- perhaps make the connection to Bakhtin here? -->

This notion of "re-investigating the material to understand why" he is drawn to it suggests a sort of dialogue through composition, and in this way, Abrahamsen's works are in communication with each other. They extend, merge, and deviate from possible trajectories suggested by the musical material, and they contain recollections, reminiscences, and echoes of other works. Abrahamsen does so with a fully mature compositional voice that is assured in its technique and powerful in ability to construct interpenetrating meaning.
