Introduction
============

**Danish composer Hans Abrahamsen’s piece for large ensemble, *Wald*
(2009), is a “series of variations” building on the opening of his
earlier piece for woodwind quintet entitled “Walden” (1978). This return
to his own music stemmed from a crisis in Abrahamsen’s compositional
life,** between 1991 and 1999, **when he** took an extended break from
composing. **At this time,** Abrahamsen experienced debilitating
writer's block**; he wrote** that he was "paralyzed by the white paper"
and "felt that his music had become so complex that he no longer had the
tools to create what he tried to imagine."[^1] While he stopped taking
commissions **\[ \]**, he did not stop working. Throughout this period,
which he calls the "fermata" of his compositional life, Abrahamsen found
inspiration in arranging and orchestrating other composers' works as
well as his own earlier pieces. This period of reflection,
contemplation, and private work provided the necessary catalyst **\[
\]** to a new stylistic period, one built upon the foundations of his
first period but extended beyond it to new territory.

A precocious young composer, Abrahamsen had written a confident body of
work by **age 27 (1979)** and was a prominent figure associated with the
Danish "New Simplicity" movement. This movement was largely a reaction
against Darmstadt serialism **which** sought to "establish a perceptible
sense of form and to evolve a new relationship with past musical styles
and objects."2 **Abrahamsen’s** works of this first period,
**including** *Ten Preludes for String Quartet* (1973),
*Stratifications* (1975), *Winternacht* (1976-78), and *Walden* (1978),
blended the clarity of expression and economy of musical materials
associated with "New Simplicity" along with elements of neo-classicism,
neo-romanticism, and collage-like polystylism. **L**ater first period
works, like *Six Pieces* (1984) for horn, violin, and piano, and
*Märchenbilder* (1984), and *Lied in Fall* (1987) show a greater sense
of chromaticism and denser, more granular textures, perhaps revealing
the influence of his teacher György Ligeti.**\[ footnote ? \]**

The musical style of Abrahamsen's second period is deeply informed by
the groundwork he laid during the period of his "fermata." He returned
to his older works and reorchestrated them for alternate ensembles, most
notably the woodwind quintet *Walden* and septet *Winternacht*. He
arranged and orchestrated works by Ives, Nielsen, Nørgård, and Ravel for
ensembles ranging in size from woodwind quintet to chamber orchestra.
Most importantly, Abrahamsen found inspiration in a set of canons by
J.S. Bach[^2] that he arranged with a distinctly Minimalist aesthetic, a
pairing he would later revisit in *Schnee* (2006-08).

Abrahamsen's "fermata" ended with the *Concerto for Piano and Orchestra*
(1999-2000); **this work** initia**ted** a fertile period of artistic
synthesis that combined the practice of returning to previous works (and
referencing other composers' works) with new innovations in
compositional technique. In this second period, Abrahamsen has returned
to previous works in two ways: **arrangement for a** larger ensemble
**and** **starting from** a**n** **existing** germinal motive and
expanding upon it significantly. For instance, Abrahamsen recasts the
first four movements and eighth movement of *Ten Studies for Piano*
(1984-98) for orchestral forces in *Four Pieces for Orchestra* (2004)
and **in** the final movement of the *Piano Concerto*, respectively. On
the other hand **\[ why “on the other hand”?\]** , *Air* (2006), for
solo accordion, is a reworking and development of material from his
first piece for accordion, *Canzone* (1978), and *Air* further serves as
a point of departure for *String Quartet No. 3* (2008).[^3]

Beginning with *Schnee* (2006-08) and *Wald* (2008-09), Abrahamsen's
style crystalized into one based on tightly constrained musical
materials, microtonal sonorities, repeating material delineated by
repeat signs, frequent changes of meter, tempo modulations, and complex
polyrhythms.**\[ footnote? \]** The two works are drastically different
in scope and instrumentation, with *Schnee* scored for nine musicians
lasting an hour and *Wald* scored for fifteen musicians lasting eighteen
minutes. Abrahamsen has **nonetheless** indicated that *Wald* is a "twin
piece" to *Schnee*[^4], and indeed they share not only the
aforementioned characteristics but also clearly articulated forms and
symmetrical ensemble seating plans.

While *Schnee* has gained greater notoriety**,** due in part to its
dramatic hour-long length, *Wald* better exemplifies the synthesis of
his second period, where previous materials are recast and further
developed within the context of these new compositional resources.
***Wald*** consists of seven variations based on the beginning of his
woodwind quintet *Walden* (1978), and Abrahamsen has indicated there are
additional connections to Robert Schumann's *Waldszenen*.[^5] The
thematic material appearing in both *Walden* and *Wald* is **“**a rising
perfect fourth horn call that elicits responses from other instruments.
**“ \[ be sure to indicate quotes \]** The horn call repeats but has a
slower periodicity than the other responses leading to a gradual change
in the order of call and response. The passing of material around **the
instruments of the** ensemble figures prominently throughout the work,
and Abrahamsen controls this **feature** through the symmetrical
arrangement of the ensemble into six groups. **\[ \]** *Wald* represents
an excellent case study to discuss the features of Abrahamsen's second
period.

Scope and Methodology
=====================

This dissertation has two goals. The principle goal is to examine the
innovative compositional practices characteristic of Abrahamsen's second
period through an analysis of *Wald*. The second goal is to examine
*Wald*'s relationship to other music through the following questions: In
what ways is *Wald* based on his earlier work *Walden*? How is *Wald* a
"twin piece"[^6] to *Schnee*? Is *Wald* related **to** Schumann's
*Waldszenen* in any substantial way beyond poetic inspiration?

In order to conduct this analysis and address these questions, **the
dissertation** will be divided into three parts. Part one will place
Abrahamsen in a historical context by briefly discussing other
twentieth-century composers who have exhibited commonalities in **the**
two areas that define his second period: 1) a break preceding a
significant change in style, and 2) a predilection for reworking earlier
musical material. Part two will provide an overview of *Walden* and
*Wald* in order to compare and contrast Abrahamsen's first and second
period styles. Significant differences will be drawn between the two
periods, and the discussion of *Walden* will largely be limited to the
first movement, **since** it contains the majority of the common
material and has connections to the additional movements in the
**later** work. Part three will consist of a detailed analysis of the
introduction and seven variations in *Wald*. The focus will be on the
way Abrahamsen recasts the germinal material from *Walden* and develops
it **\[ \]** via harmony, orchestration (including timbral choices and
the symmetrical ensemble layout), and texture (including metrical
choices and polyrhythmic layering).

Summary of the Literature
=========================

**R**elatively unknown outside of Europe until recently,
**Abrahamsen’s** international profile **has** expanded significantly
after the composition of *Schnee* and more recently with the Berlin
Philharmonic premiere of **the song cycle** *let me tell you* (2014 **–
no caps?**). The Cleveland Orchestra's recent American tour of this
piece and its receipt of the 2016 Grawemeyer Award for Music has brought
further attention to **Abrahamsen** in the United States.

**However, l**ittle analytical work has been conducted on his music.
Danish composer Karl Aage Rasmussen and scholar John David White have
written books profiling Danish and Nordic composers respectively, but
their discussion of Abrahamsen is limited to his earlier career**,**
from the 1970s and 1980s.[^7] Composer Kevin Ernste's dissertation on
*Winternacht* (1978) represents one of the only in-depth analyses of his
music. Considering the existing scholarship's focus on the music of
Abrahamsen's first period, this dissertation would represent a
significant and original contribution to the knowledge on the music of his second period.

**A Preliminary View of Wald**

-   **some on Walden, and example of the theme**

-   **- general comments about orchestration, form, etc.**

-   **- short section of some detail to show analytical methodology.**

Bibliography
============

Abrahamsen, Hans. “*String Quartet No. 3*,” 2008.
<http://www.musicsalesclassical.com/composer/work/1/36682>.

———. “*Walden*,” 1978.
<http://www.musicsalesclassical.com/composer/work/1/21805>.

———. “*Wald*,” 2009.
<http://www.musicsalesclassical.com/composer/work/1/43185>.

Ernste, Kevin. “Hans Abrahamsen’s *Winternacht:* Reflections on an
Etching by M.C. Escher.” PhD thesis, University of Rochester, 2006.

Johnson, Stephen. “*Fire Stykker for Orkester*,” 2004.
http://www.musicsalesclassical.com/composer/work/1/20289.

Rasmussen, Karl Aage. *Noteworthy Danes: Portraits of Eleven Danish
Composers*. Copenhagen: Wilhelm Hansen, 1991.

Robin, William. “Hans Abrahamsen: Fame and Snow Falling on a Composer,”
2016.
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/13/arts/music/hans-abrahamsen-fame-and-snow-falling-on-a-composer.html>.

White, John David. *New Music of the Nordic Countries*. Hillsdale, NY:
Pendragon Press, 2002.

[^1]: Robin, “Hans Abrahamsen: Fame and Snow Falling on a Composer.”

[^2]: BWV 1072-1078

[^3]: Abrahamsen, “*String Quartet No. 3*” Program note.

[^4]: Abrahamsen, “*Wald*” Program note.

[^5]: Ibid. Program note.

[^6]: Ibid. Program note.

[^7]: Rasmussen, *Noteworthy Danes*. White, *New Music of the Nordic
    Countries*.
