# The Music of Hans Abrahamsen

[Thomas Michelsen][]

> In 1999-2000 Hans Abrahamsen wrote a piano concerto. It lasts just over a quarter of an hour. Nevertheless this compact work holds all the important keys to the understanding of the composer – of his way of working with music and of the development of his oeuvre, which has extended over 35 year so far.

The piano concerto begins with flightily nervous, layered music. It is Romantically coloured music. The idiom is related to what we encounter in earlier core works by Abrahamsen such as *Winternacht*, *Märchenbilder* and *Nacht und Trompeten*; works the composer wrote at the end of 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s, and which have made his name both in Denmark and abroad.

The piano concerto begins in this vibrant, poetically sensual world with its various simultaneous layers. But after less than half a minute the music freezes – is fractured so to speak, and goes into spasms. Then it develops new aspects of Abrahamsen's universe; aspects that the composer began to explore after he took an extended break from writing in the 1990s and concentrated on adaptations of other people's music.

Abrahamsen expresses himself in concentrated form. If we pay close attention as the music requires, we discover references not only to other works by the composer, but also to the works of older composers. In the trumpet part of the central second movement of the piano concerto, for example, there is an unmistakable if discreet reference to Mahler's Fifth Symphony. Where the trumpet repeats the note C sharp, the composer has noted in the score "(wie Mahler!)". And in the third movement, in the last bars of the horn part, one finds a similar tribute to the Hungarian composer György Ligeti and his use of the natural horn technique in the horn trio.

How do such quotations find their way into the music? The answer is that they do not 'find their way' at all. They come – or better still, they arise or emerge – from the music itself. "To compose is to go in and find something in the music that I did not know was there to begin with. To investigate the music and find new things in the tonal material that surprises me and captivate me."

That is how Hans Abrahamsen answers the question about what it means for him to compose. For many people it will probably be a surprising answer. For doesn't a composer begin with a sheet of blank music paper when he is about to write a new piece? So what kind of music is there to begin with? What is this tonal material that has to be investigated – and which is even able to generate discoveries that can surprise the composer himself and, among other things, take on the character of quotations?

The answer to these questions takes us to the core of Hans Abrahamsen's art; an art that began as a radically objective, tightly structured game with clearly demarcated tonal materials, but which has developed over the years towards a decidedly expressively coloured idiom, and which has most recently begun to move in new, still partly unexplored directions. It is art that is highly sensitive in expression – emotional, vibrant and responsive – and which is constantly working its way towards new boundaries; but which at the same time listens attentively to the past; both to its own close past and to the great past of musical history.

The fact that several kinds of music can exist peacefully side by side like this in the same work – that there is room for all sorts of different idioms in one and the same piece of music – was a crucial ideal for the young Hans Abrahamsen. This stylistic pluralism, combined with the transparence of form and structure typical of *Skum*, in his own words recalls the contemporary idiom of the Danish painter Per Kirkeby. Abrahamsen explains: "In that period Kirkeby painted certain series of pictures where each series consisted of very different subjects that couldn't stand alone, but were legitimized by being in this form, as part of a stylistic pluralism. The form of the picture series further referred to the possibility of reflecting on series as pictures of pictures, and so both a distance and an intensified closeness arose in the work." The same principle can be found in the first part of Abrahamsen's orchestral piece Stratifications from 1973/75, which similarly has the character of film clips, and in the ten extremely varied movements that make up Abrahamsen's first string quartet, Ten Preludes, from 1973.

In the central fifth movement of the quartet, simple, tonally constructed chords emerge from the strictly objective, completely concretist mechanics of the movement. It is a crucial point that these tetrads are on the one hand charged with emotional content – they just have to be for anyone familiar with the works of the Classical-Romantic composers – but that they have on the other hand arisen unintentionally, as a result of the concretist process.

The objective process, as we have seen, permits subjective-sounding, expressive 'objects' to sound forth. Just as, in the early works, concretism made it possible to fill rigorous structures with a boundless freedom in the variety of the content, concretism makes it possible for the composer to handle emotionally charged musical objects in the works from the middle period.

But the process can also go the other way. In 2002-2003, when Hans Abrahamsen composed the orchestral work Four Pieces for Orchestra, he went back to the first four of the Ten Piano Studies from the beginning of the eighties, wishing among other things to use the expansion to add extra emotional nuances. The idea of recomposing the piano studies for a large orchestra had already occurred to Abrahamsen during the writing of the studies in the 1980s. It was thus part of the original plan when Abrahamsen began the work of recomposing and expanding them both in time and space. And as the orchestral work now appears, the four pieces have become twice as long, arranged for an orchestra of Mahlerian dimensions. In the music we find echoes of the post-Wagnerian orchestral repertoire; but exactly that – only echoes, as transitory emotional memories, fragments experienced in dreams or as déjà vu. The distance of the modern observer is maintained, a distance which in the words of the poet Thomas Campbell "lends enchantment to the view". And while one can immediately hear the composer's own fascination with the Romantic masterpieces in Hans Abrahamsen's music, there is at the same time the pathos of that distance, through which the music of the past (including Abrahamsen's own) is contemplated from a quite different musical perspective.
And so Hans Abrahamsen's music is in constant, continuous development, no matter how independent each new work may sound in relation to its predecessor. The music is in a constant, developmental dialogue with itself – as is the composer with himself.

**In the second movement of the piano concerto, which begins with the surprisingly beautiful piano solo, the music is in reality not newly composed at all, it is an extract from the piano part of the second movement of Märchenbilder, taken out of its original score and inserted in the concerto. "I would never be able to compose it, just like that," explains Hans Abrahamsen. "This solo passage for the piano arose out of the material that surrounds the passage in Märchenbilder. Behind its apparent simplicity, in other words, lies great complexity! It is the history of this piano part has that made it possible for me to write it into the piano concerto."**

Along with the last three of the ten piano studies that were written in 1998 after the break in composition throughout the nineties, the piano concerto, the Four Pieces for Orchestra and Three Little Nocturnes from 2005 for the accordionist Frode Haltli and the Cikada String Quartet mark a new segment of the composer's oeuvre; a new, third period after the first period's strict, cool concretism and the middle period's far more poetic works.

[Thomas Michelsen]: http://icls.fimc.net/hearhere/article.asp?id=1243368
